Cambiodian fish refuges
================

## Overview

*This repository contains code to analyse catch and biodiversity
patterns from the Community Fish Refuges in Rice field Fisheries.*

Inland fisheries of the southern Mekong basin are some of the largest in
the world and are crucial to household food and nutrition security
throughout the region. These fisheries rely on a bimodal seasonal
inundation of monsoon rains that reconnect isolated water bodies and
their fish populations. However, water infrastructure developments and
climate change represent significant threats to the reliability and
effect of this annual flood pulse, driving negative impacts on aquatic
biodiversity and biomass. Augmentation and management of natural and
artificial dry season habitats as community fish refuges (CFRs) have
been trialled in Cambodia since 2005 as a way of maintaining biomass and
biodiversity of wild aquatic species. Large spatio-temporal variations
in the biodiversity and biomass of assemblages are expected in flood
pulse systems, however there is still little understanding of the
drivers of this variation with which to guide further development
interventions around rice field fisheries conservation and livelihoods.
Using quarterly fisheries independent catch surveys and biological
monitoring at 40 CFRs in Cambodia from 2012 to 2015, we evaluate the
effectiveness of CFRs at retaining biomass and biodiversity through the
dry season to guide development, conservation and fisheries strategy.

## Notebooks

**Data exploration:**

  - [Sampling bias](notebooks/sampling-bias.md)
  - [Catch composition](notebooks/catch-composition.md)
  - [Seasonality](notebooks/seasonality.md)
  - [Correspondence analysis](notebooks/correspondence-analysis.md)
  - [Alpha diversity patterns](notebooks/diversity.md)
  - [Beta diversity patterns](notebooks/beta-diversity-index.md)

**Analysis**

  - [Tentative analysis plan](notebooks/analysis-plan.md)
  - [Preliminary analysis](report.md)
